Refget version 2.0.0 bump (#479)
samtools/hts-specs: refget.md

Reviewer: Can the `md5` return value in `metadata` also be null (same as with `ga4gh`)? According to the specs above, a server can support either checksum and leaves the option open that `md5` is not support ("Servers MUST support sequence retrieval by one or more of these algorithms [...]").

Author: Good point checking the spec we have inconsistency between `md5` and `ga4gh`. Makes sense [the md5 line changes](https://github.com/andrewyatz/hts-specs/blob/feature/2.0.0/refget.md?plain=1#L255) to

```
md5, if the server does not support md5 the value will be <code>null</code>.
```

Thoughts from other refget people? Also will post this in the refget Slack channel for visibility

Reviewer 2: Thanks for bringing that up. we should indeed treat `md5` and `ga4gh` the same way and I actually think we should explicitly allow the field to be missing when the algorithm is not supported.

Reviewer: I just spotted this bit in the int "Alternative Checksum Algorithms" section:
> Refget implementations MUST support the MD5 identifier space and SHOULD support the ga4gh identifier.

That would indicate that md5 can't be null after all.

Author: Ah yes. I think this is us pushing to make sure each instance supports CRAM by default since CRAM doesn't sniff a refget by default

Reviewer 3: It's something that could be changed in a future CRAM release, but they've been proving hard to get out the door!

Reviewer 2: I tried to clarify this in https://github.com/andrewyatz/hts-specs/pull/9/commits/3b0ba58b86a8047c2bbd6701ba71bc6ec57cac70 but I have not changed the requirement for have `md5` specified.

Reviewer: If a sub-sequence is requested, the response must only contain the specified sub-sequence.

Is this a must since the server can decide to ignore the Range header and return the full sequence?

If a sub-sequence is requested via a Range header, the response must be one of 206 and only contain the specified sub-sequence, be 200 and contain the entire sequence (thus ignoring the Range header) [...]

Author: Good point. It's more if the server supports ranges then it must support it but we accepted that some instances just don't do this right.

Reviewer: > subsequence_limit: An integer giving the maximum length of sequence which may be requested using start and/or end query parameters.

From a discussion with @andrewyatz, the `subsequence_limit` seems to apply to both query and header. I might be good to also mention the Range header here.

Author: Yes I believe it did

Reviewer 2: Thank you for the suggestion, I've clarified this point in https://github.com/andrewyatz/hts-specs/pull/9/commits/459683bcf142e527b416d461aafaeb7041296e69

Author: You're fine to redirect all types of request. This was trying to define what the redirection code we wanted to use was

Author: This is stated in the protocol essentials

> HTTP response may include a 3XX response code and Location header redirecting the client to retrieve sequence data from an alternate location as specified by [RFC 7231](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231), clients SHOULD be configured follow redirects. 302, 303 and 307 are all valid response codes to use.

The policies and processes used to perform user authentication and authorization, and the means through which access tokens are issued, are beyond the scope of this API specification. GA4GH recommends the use of the OAuth 2.0 framework ([RFC 6749](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749)) for authentication and authorization.

## Checksum calculation

> The supported checksum algorithms are `MD5` (a 32 character HEX string) and a SHA-512 based system called `ga4gh` (a base64 URL-safe string, see later for details). Servers MUST support sequence retrieval by one or more of these algorithms, and are encouraged to support all to maximize interoperability. An older algorithm called `TRUNC512` existed in version 1.0.0 of refget but is now deprecated in favour of the GA4GH sequence checksum string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended checksum algorithms are `MD5` (a 32 character HEX string) and a SHA-512 based system called `ga4gh` (a base64 URL-safe string, see later for details). Servers MUST support sequence retrieval by one or more of these algorithms, and are encouraged to support all to maximize interoperability. An older algorithm called `TRUNC512` existed in version 1.0.0 of refget but is now deprecated in favour of the GA4GH sequence checksum string.
```

GET /sequence/service-info

> 

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we take the opportunity of a major version change to move the service-info at the top level ?
I think this is what's implied in the [explanation](https://github.com/ga4gh-discovery/ga4gh-service-info#how-do-i-describe-a-service-implementing-multiple-specifications) of how multiple services should be described.

Author: Done in commit 12cbba1ceaed8dd71307a9ae71e397e0ce2d690e

{
  "id": "org.ga4gh.refget",
  "name": "Refget server",
  "type": {
    "group": "org.ga4gh",
    "artifact": "refget",
    "version": "2.0.0"
  },
  "description": "Reference sequences from checksums",
  "organization": {
    "name": "My organization",
    "url": "https://example.com"
  },
  "contactUrl": "mailto:support@example.com",
  "documentationUrl": "https://docs.myservice.example.com",
  "createdAt": "2019-06-04T12:58:19Z",
  "updatedAt": "2019-06-04T12:58:19Z",
  "environment": "prod",
  "version": "2.0.0",
  "refget": {
    "circular_supported": true,
    "subsequence_limit": 0,

>     "algorithms": [
>       [
>         "md5",
>         "ga4gh",
>         "trunc512"
>       ]
>     ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "algorithms": [
      "md5",
      "ga4gh",
      "trunc512"
    ]
```

Author: Done

- CRAM Reference Registry
  - Input comes into the registry via ENA
  - ENA allows input conforming to the following regular expression `(?i)^([ACGTUMRWSYKVHDBN]+)\\*?$"`
- VRS
  - VRS requires sequence to be a string of IUPAC codes for either nucleotide or protein sequence

Considering the requirements of the three systems the specification designers felt it was sufficient to restrict input to the inclusive range `65` (`0x41`/`A`) to `90` (`0x5A`/`Z`). Changes to this normalisation algorithm would require a new checksum identifier to be used.

### Checksum Choice

MD5 provides adequate protection against hash collisions occurring from sequences. However the consequence of a sequence derived hash collision appearing would be catastrophic as two or more sequences with different content would report to be the same entity.

> The VRS, Variation Representation Specification, is a complementary GA4GH effort to model genomic variation based on deviations from a reference sequence. Part of their work was to explore hashing algorithms. We have adopted the [checksum algorithm from VRS v1](https://vr-spec.readthedocs.io/), based around the SHA-512 algorithm.

Reviewer 2: If we are pointing to VRS v1.0 I suggest we change the url to https://vrs.ga4gh.org/en/1.0/ or https://vrs.ga4gh.org/en/1.0/impl-guide/computed_identifiers.html#truncated-digest-sha512t24u if we want to be very precise.
```suggestion
The VRS, Variation Representation Specification, is a complementary GA4GH effort to model genomic variation based on deviations from a reference sequence. Part of their work was to explore hashing algorithms. We have adopted the [checksum algorithm from VRS v1](https://vrs.ga4gh.org/en/1.0/impl-guide/computed_identifiers.html#truncated-digest-sha512t24u), based around the SHA-512 algorithm.
```

Author: Done

The VRS, Variation Representation Specification, is a complementary GA4GH effort to model genomic variation based on deviations from a reference sequence. Part of their work was to explore hashing algorithms. We have adopted the [checksum algorithm from VRS v1](https://vrs.ga4gh.org/en/1.0/impl-guide/computed_identifiers.html#truncated-digest-sha512t24u), based around the SHA-512 algorithm.

> The algorithm performs a SHA-512 digest of a sequence and creates a base64url encoding ([using RFC 4648](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-5)) of the first 24 bytes of the digest. Analysis performed by VRS suggests this should be sufficient to avoid message collisions (see the VRS documentation for more details). Should a message collision occur within this scheme then the number of bytes retained from the SHA-512 checksum will be increased.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The algorithm performs a SHA-512 digest of a sequence and creates a base64url encoding ([as defined in RFC 4648](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-5)) of the first 24 bytes of the digest. Analysis performed by VRS suggests this should be sufficient to avoid message collisions (see the VRS documentation for more details). Should a message collision occur within this scheme then the number of bytes retained from the SHA-512 checksum will be increased.
```
